Eu migraion revamp (#2017)
mendersoftware/mender-docs: 301.Troubleshoot/10.Hosted-Mender-migration/docs.md

---
title: Hosted Mender - tenant migration
taxonomy:
    category: docs
---

Historically we have only had a single instance in the US.

> We have expanded and Hosted Mender instances are offered in [multiple regions](/11.General/00.Hosted-Mender-regions/docs.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hosted Mender instances are now available in [multiple regions] (11.General/00.Hosted-Mender-regions/docs.md) as a result of our expansion.
```

> If you already have a fleet of devices working with the US instance and would like to move to a different one, this document will explain the migration process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document will describe the migration process if you currently have a fleet of devices operating in one instance and would like to move them to another one.
```

!! Migration between instances without risks requires support assistance and is a payed service.

> !! If you wish to migrate your account please contact us on [support@mender.io](mailto:contact@mender.io) with the title **Tenant migration**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!! If you wish to migrate your account please contact us on [support@mender.io](mailto:contact@mender.io?subject=Tenant%20migration) with the subject **Tenant migration**.
```

Author: Oh!
Just noticed I did this incorrectly :)
`mailto` is `contact@mender.io` and the link is `support`. Have to change that

## Introduction

> Going forward the following terms will be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Going forward, the following terms will be used for clarity:
```

!!! Mender currently supports these [regions](/11.General/00.Hosted-Mender-regions/docs.md).
!! Migration between instances without risks requires support assistance and is a payed service.
!! If you wish to migrate your account please contact us on [support@mender.io](mailto:contact@mender.io) with the title **Tenant migration**.

## Introduction

The migration from one server to the other consists of three steps:
* From hosted Mender, deploy a software update to your devices which contains an updated
`mender.conf` file. This new configuration will use the `Servers` property to specify an array of
server URLs.
* Reject devices from the old server, so that the devices fallback to the new server once they get
Unauthorized error from the old server.
* From EU hosted Mender, deploy a new software update with a `mender.conf` containing only the new
server. This step is a formal clean-up and not urgent.
Going forward the following terms will be used:
* **Old server** will represent the server that you want to move away from
* **New server** will represent the server that you want to migrate to

> !!! Note that this method will not work on generic instances of the Mender server. It is only

Reviewer: Not sure if we should remove this warning, I remember I asked about moving tenants from HM to on-prem instances and got the answer was that without the tenant administration changes (in the pipeline already) this can be risky (security) and we do not recommend to perform it.

Author: Thanks, will reevaluate

Author: How does this sound:

> Please note that this method only applies for HM mender instances and isn't applicable for on-prem migrations.

> The migration from one server to the other consists of these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following steps summarize the procedure for moving from one server to another:
```

> The diagram below show describes the flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The diagram below, describes the flow
```

We will get back to you once the tenant has been cloned and you can proceed to the next step.

#### 2. Update the device with configuration for both servers

This will largely depend on the way you create build artifacts.
Regardless of the approach the goal to update the device so it's config (`/etc/mender/mender.conf`) changes from:

```
{
    "ServerURL": "https://hosted.mender.io",
    "TenantToken": "abcdefghijklm1234567890",
    ... <Other config parameters>
}
```

to

```
{
  "Servers": [
    {
      "ServerURL": "https://hosted.mender.io"
    },
    {
      "ServerURL": "https://eu.hosted.mender.io"
    }
  ],
  "TenantToken": "abcdefghijklm1234567890",
  ... <Other config parameters>
}
```

!! Make sure you removed the `ServerURL` entry from the top of the JSON configuration. [More info here](../../03.Client-installation/07.Configuration-file/50.Configuration-options/docs.md#servers).

Please check bellow for different approaches on how to achieve this:

* [Yocto](#yocto)
* [Debian](#debian)
* [Custom update module](#custom-update-module)

> !! If you deploy a config file with a badly formatted json, mender-client on the device won't start correctly after the update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!! If you deploy a config file with a badly formatted json, `mender-client` on the device won't start correctly after the update.
```

!! The device will roll back to the previous version only after the device is restarted by other means.
!! During that server will show the deployment status as "rebooting" and after the roll back the deployment will fail.

Please make sure to test the migration with one device first before deploying it to the whole production fleet.

#### 3. Reject the device on the Old server

Once the deployment was successful and the device restarts, it will try communicating with the first server on the list.
That is the Old server.

> As we want to cut communication with the Old server, reject the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we want to avoid communication to the Old server, proceed and reject the device.
```

Author: I'm not sure `avoid` works here, we really want to cut all communication with the old server will be decommisioned at the end of this step.

I'll use `stop` instead of `cut` though.

![reject-device](reject-device.png)

#### 4. Accept the device on the New server

> As the device can't connect to the primary server on the list it will try the alternative, which is in this case the Old server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the device cannot connect to the first server on the list, it will try with the next one. In this case, it is the New server.
```

Author: Applied directly in other commit

Once the device is correctly showing on the New server the last step is to deploy the configuration containing only the New server.

```
{
    "ServerURL": "https://eu.hosted.mender.io",
    "TenantToken": "abcdefghijklm1234567890",
    ... <Other config parameters>
}
```

## Methods for changing the configuration

### Yocto

For Yocto project integrations, if you are already passing your own configuration file to the build,
as described in [Customize Mender](../../05.Operating-System-updates-Yocto-Project/05.Customize-Mender/docs.md#configuration-file), modify your `mender.conf` to include `Servers` array.

If instead you are relying on `meta-mender` to autogenerate a configuration file based on variables
you need to first capture the currently generated `mender.conf`, modify it, and use the [Customize
Mender](../../05.Operating-System-updates-Yocto-Project/05.Customize-Mender/docs.md#configuration-file) method
to inject it back into the build. The file can be captured from a live device or from yocto
`tmp/deploy/` directory (which will depend a bit on your setup).

At the end of the process you should have two mender artifacts:

> * one containing the config for both old and new server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* one containing the config for both Old and New server
```

> * one containing the config for the new server only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* one containing the config for the New server only
```

]' > mender.new.conf
```

At the end of the process you should have two mender artifacts:

> * one containing the config for both old and new server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* one containing the config for both Old and New server
```

> * one containing the config for the new server only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* one containing the config for the New server only
```

> ### Custom update module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Custom Update Module
```

It is also possible do the migration without having to do a full rootfs update.

> This can be done by deploying a custom update module just for this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be done by deploying a custom Update Module just for this case.
```

> !! Please note that the update module is provided as an example only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!! Please note that the Update Module is provided as an example only.
```
